Introduction
=============

What is Gitology?
------------------

Gitology clearly explains a wide variety of practical Git concepts and techniques.

Gitology helps you use Git more effectively and enjoy increasingly efficient workflows. Your new knowledge and skills will make your work and life more effortless--and who doesn't want that?

For example, you will learn how to

* Install and configure Git
* Manage a project with Git
* Use Git's fantastic branching
* Set up a collaborative server
* Solve common problems
* Much more

Why Read Gitology?
-------------------------------------

There are two primary reasons to read Gitology:

1. Git is tremendously useful. And the more skilled with it you become, the better your life will be.
2. Gitology helps you increase your Git skills and knowledge.

Like you, I lead a busy life, so I will respect both our time by explaining exactly what you need to know as clearly as possible. 

Who Is Gitology Written For?
----------------

Gitology is written primarily for people who are new to Git and people who have mastered basic Git skills but want to explore intermediate techniques. Advanced topics are not covered.

However, that said, it's possble that more advanced topics will be added in the future.

Updates
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Gitology is a work in progress. At the time of this writing, I am trying to work on Gitology every day until "version 1.0" is done. 
You can get news and updates on [Identica](http://identi.ca/gitology) or [Twitter](http://twitter.com/gitology)

Feedback
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Feel free to send me suggestions for the site via [Identica](http://identi.ca/gitology) or [Twitter](http://twitter.com/gitology) or via email: brian at gitology.com
